The final component of the inertia measurement
unit are the sensors that measure angular
velocity, and these are commonly referred
to as gyroscopes. You might have had a gyroscope
as a toy when you were a child, and it is
difficult to understand the relationship between
this toy gyroscope, which can balance on the
end of a pencil with a device that can measure
angular velocity. To understand how we can
use a gyroscope as an angular velocity sensor,
we need to get right back to fundamentals
of spinning bodies. Here, we have a disc which
is spinning about the axis shown by the dotted
line, and it is spinning with an angular velocity,
omega g and the disc has got a rotational
inertia, j. We refer to the angular momentum
of this disc and give that the symbol h.
h is j times omega g. Now, let's
imagine that I apply a torque to this rotating
disc. If I do that, the disc wants to rotate
about the axis shown by the blue arrow. It's
the cross product of the vector h and
the vector Tau.
What we have here is a gyroscope and at the
moment, the device is not spinning we can
see that it moves very freely and nicely inside
its gimbal mechanism. If I turn the motor
on, it takes a little moment to come up to
speed, it now behaves very very differently.
Now, I'm going to rotate the spinning disc
assembly about the blue arrow and now; the
spinning disc is going to exert a torque about
the red arrow, and that torque is the cross
product of the vectors omega and h.
So, how do I measure the torque? If the disc
axis is supported by two bearings then, this
torque will exert a force up on one bearing
and down on the other bearing, and those forces
can be measured. The spinning disc then has
converted the angular velocity omega into
a torque which is then, measured using force
sensors.
Importantly, if I pull on this axis of the
gyroscope with a rubber band, I am basically
going to exert a force on it. And so, I pull
in this direction. You will see that the gyroscope
is trying to rotate about an axis like this.
Angular velocity sensors based on spinning
discs are not very common anymore. They tend
to be rather bulky and require a lot of power
to keep that disc spinning. Sensors today
are based on vibrating rather than rotating
element, but we still tend to call them gyroscopes
or gyroscopic sensors. The vibrating elements
are fabricated using ‘MEMS’ technology.
So, the sensing elements themselves are microscopic
in size but the underlying principle is the
same. Angular velocity in the sensor causes
forces or torques to be exerted on the micro
scale elements and that leads to displacements,
which can be measured and amplified to produce
an angular velocity signal. As with accelerometers
and magnetometers it is very common to package
three gyroscope sensors into a single chip,
and they are arranged orthogonally again so
they measure the three components of the angular
velocity vector. Just as you have accelerometers
in your head, you also have gyroscopes in
your head and once again, these are in the
inner ear assembly. In particular, the three
very distinctive elements known as the semi-circular
canals. These are very thin tubes filled with
fluid and rotational motion of your head causes
the liquid in those tubes to move. The motion
of a fluid is detected by tiny hair cells
within the canals, and this leads to an angular
velocity signal to your brain. The angular
velocity signal is combined with motion information
that comes from your eyes. If these two signals
are not consistent, it leads to a problem
which we experience as motion sickness, that's
when our inner ear is telling us that our
body is moving in one way, but our eyes tell
us that our body is moving in a different
way. So, this is motion sickness or sea sickness,
and our body responds rather illogically by
wanting us to throw up.